---
---
<img src="https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/u/35607965" alt="OCFL Hand-drive logo" style="float:right;width:307px;height:307px;"/>
# Oxford Common File Layout Specification

Unofficial Draft 05 May 2022

Latest editor's draft: <https://ocfl.io/draft/spec/>

**Editors:**

* [Neil Jefferies](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3311-3741), [Bodleian Libraries, University of Oxford](http://www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/)
* [Rosalyn Metz](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3526-2230), [Emory University](https://web.library.emory.edu/)
* [Julian Morley](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4176-1933), [Stanford University](https://library.stanford.edu/)
* [Simeon Warner](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7970-7855), [Cornell University](https://www.library.cornell.edu/)
* [Andrew Woods](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8318-4225), [Harvard University](https://library.harvard.edu/)

**Additional Documents:**

* [Implementation Notes](https://ocfl.io/draft/implementation-notes/)
* [Validation Codes](https://ocfl.io/draft/spec/validation-codes.html)
* [Extensions](https://github.com/OCFL/extensions/)

**Previous version:**
* <https://ocfl.io/1.0/spec/>

**Repository:**
* [Github](https://github.com/ocfl/spec)
* [Issues](https://github.com/ocfl/spec/issues)
* [Commits](https://github.com/ocfl/spec/commits)
* [Use Cases](https://github.com/ocfl/Use-Cases)

This document is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). [OCFL logo:
"hand-drive"](https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/u/35607965) by
[Patrick Hochstenbach](http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8390-6171) is
licensed under [CC BY 2.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/).
## Introduction
{: #abstract}

This Oxford Common File Layout (OCFL) specification describes an
application-independent approach to the storage of digital objects in a
structured, transparent, and predictable manner. It is designed to
promote long-term access and management of digital objects within
digital repositories.

### Need
{: #need}

The OCFL initiative began as a discussion amongst digital repository
practitioners to identify well-defined, common, and
application-independent file management for a digital repository's
persisted objects and represents a specification of the communityâ€™s
collective recommendations addressing five primary requirements:
completeness, parsability, versioning, robustness, and storage
diversity.

#### Completeness
{: #completeness}

The OCFL recommends storing metadata and the content it describes
together so the OCFL object can be fully understood in the absence of
original software. The OCFL does not make recommendations about what
constitutes an object, nor does it assume what type of metadata is
needed to fully understand the object, recognizing those decisions may
differ from one repository to another. However, it is recommended that
when making this decision, implementers consider what is necessary to
rebuild the objects from the files stored.

#### Parsability
{: #parsability}

One goal of the OCFL is to ensure objects remain fixed over time. This
can be difficult as software and infrastructure change, and content is
migrated. To combat this challenge, the OCFL ensures that both humans
and machines can understand the layout and corresponding inventory
regardless of the software or infrastructure used. This allows for
humans to read the layout and corresponding inventory, and understand it
without the use of machines. Additionally, if existing software were to
become obsolete, the OCFL could easily be understood by a light weight
application, even without the full feature repository that might have
been used in the past.

#### Versioning
{: #versioning}

Another need expressed by the community was the need to update and
change objects, either the content itself or the metadata associated
with the object. The OCFL relies heavily on the prior art in the
\[[Moab](#ref-moab)\] Design for Digital Object Versioning which
utilizes forward deltas to track the history of the object. Utilizing
this schema allows implementers of the OCFL to easily recreate past
versions of an OCFL object. Like with objects, the OCFL remains silent
on when versioning should occur recognizing this may differ from
implementation to implementation.

#### Robustness
{: #robustness}

The OCFL also fills the need for robustness against errors, corruption,
and migration. The versioning schema ensures an OCFL object is robust
enough to allow for the discovery of human errors. The fixity checking
built into the OCFL via content addressable storage allows implementers
to identify file corruption that might happen outside of normal human
interactions. The OCFL eases content migrations by providing a
technology agnostic method for verifying OCFL objects have remained
fixed.

#### Storage diversity
{: #storage-diversity}

Finally, the community expressed a need to store content on a wide
variety of storage technologies. With that in mind, the OCFL was written
with an eye toward various storage infrastructures including cloud
object stores.

### Note
{: #note}

This normative specification describes the nature of an OCFL Object (the
"object-at-rest") and the arrangement of OCFL Objects under an OCFL
Storage Root. A set of recommendations for how OCFL Objects should be
acted upon (the "object-in-motion") can be found in the
\[[OCFL-Implementation-Notes](#ref-ocfl-implementation-notes)\]. The
OCFL editorial group recommends reading both the specification and the
implementation notes in order to understand the full scope of the OCFL.

This specification is designed to operate on storage systems that employ
a hierarchical metaphor for presenting data to users. On traditional
disk-based storage this may take the form of files and directories, and
this is the terminology we use in this specification since it is widely
known. However, it may equally apply to object stores, where namespaces,
containers, and objects present a similar organization hierarchy to
users.

## Status of This Document
{: #sotd}

This document is draft of a potential specification. It has no official
standing of any kind and does not represent the support or consensus of
any standards organisation.

## 1. Conformance
{: #conformance}

As well as sections marked as non-normative, all authoring guidelines,
diagrams, examples, and notes in this specification are non-normative.
Everything else in this specification is normative.

The key words may, must, must not, should, and should not are to be
interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

## 2. Terminology
{: #terminology}

* **Content Path:** The file path of a file on disk or in an object
store, relative to the [OCFL Object Root](#OCFL Object Root). Content
paths are used in the [Manifest](#Manifest) within an
[Inventory](#Inventory).

* **Digest:** An algorithmic characterization of the contents of a file
conforming to a standard digest algorithm.

* **Extension:** Extensions are used to collaborate, review, and publish
additional non-normative functions related to OCFL. Extensions are
intended to be informational and cite-able, but outside the scope of the
normal specification process. Registered extensions may be found in the
[OCFL Extensions repository.](https://ocfl.github.io/extensions/)

* **Inventory:** A file, expressed in JSON, that tracks the history and
current state of an OCFL Object.

* **Logical Path:** A path that represents a file's location in the
[logical state](#logical state) of an object. Logical paths are used in
conjunction with a digest to represent the file name and path for a
given bitstream at a given version.

* **Logical State:** A grouping of logical paths tied to their
corresponding bitstreams that reflect the state of the object content
for a given version.

* **Logs Directory:** A directory for storing information about the
content (e.g., actions performed) that is not part of the content
itself.

* **Manifest:** A section of the [Inventory](#Inventory) listing all
files and their digests within an OCFL Object.

* **OCFL Object:** A group of one or more content files and
administrative information, that together have a unique identifier. The
object may contain a sequence of versions of the files that represent
the evolution of the object's contents.

* **OCFL Object Root:** The base directory of an [OCFL Object](#OCFL
Object), identified by a \[[NAMASTE](#ref-namaste)\] file
"0=ocfl_object_1.1".

* **OCFL Storage Root:** A base directory used to store OCFL Objects,
identified by a \[[NAMASTE](#ref-namaste)\] file "0=ocfl_1.1".

* **OCFL Version:** The state of an [OCFL Object](#OCFL Object)'s
content which is constructed using the incremental changes recorded in
the sequence of corresponding and prior version directories.

* **Registered Extension Name:** The registered name of an extension is
the name provided in the _Extension Name_ property of the extension's
definition in the [OCFL Extensions
repository](https://ocfl.github.io/extensions/).

## 3. OCFL Object
{: #object-spec}

An OCFL Object is a group of one or more content files and
administrative information, that are together identified by a URI. The
object may contain a sequence of versions of the files that represent
the evolution of the object's contents.

A file is defined as a content bitstream that can be stored and
transmitted. Directories (also called "folders") allow for the
organization of files into tree-like hierarchies. The content of an OCFL
Object is the files and the directories they are organized in that are
stored _within_ the hierarchy layout described in this specification.

An OCFL Object includes administrative information that identifies a
directory as an OCFL Object, and also provides a means of tracking
changes to the contents of the object over time.

An OCFL Object is therefore:

1. A conceptual gathering of all files (data and metadata), the
directories they are organized in, and their changes over time which
together form the digital representation of an entity that need to be
managed, in preservation terms, as a single coherent whole (i.e.,
content); and

2. A file and directory layout and administrative information on a
storage medium that provides a defined structure for the storage of this
content, and through which these files and their changes may be
understood (i.e., structure).

A key goal of the OCFL is the rebuildability of a repository from an
OCFL Storage Root without additional information resources.
Consequently, a key implementation consideration should be to ensure
that OCFL Objects contain all the data and metadata required to achieve
this. With reference to the \[[OAIS](#ref-oais)\] model, this would
include all the descriptive, administrative, structural, representation
and preservation metadata relevant to the object.

A central feature of the OCFL specification is support for versioning.
This recognizes that digital objects will change over time, through new
requirements, fixes, updates, or format shifts. The specification takes
no position on what constitutes a version or a versionable action, but
it is recommended that implementers have a clear position on this within
their local storage policies.

### 3.1 Object Structure
{: #object-structure}

The OCFL Object structure organizes content files and administrative
information in order to support content storage and object validation.
The structure for an object with one version is shown in the following
figure:

```
[object_root]
    â”œâ”€â”€ 0=ocfl_object_1.1
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
    â””â”€â”€ v1
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
        â””â”€â”€ content
               â””â”€â”€ ... content files ...
```

The [OCFL Object Root](#OCFL Object Root)<span id="E001">MUST NOT</span>
contain files or directories other than those specified in the following
sections.

### 3.2 Object Conformance Declaration
{: #object-conformance-declaration}

The OCFL specification version declaration <span id="E002">MUST</span>
be formatted according to the \[[NAMASTE](#ref-namaste)\] specification.
There <span id="E003">MUST</span> be exactly one version declaration
file in the base directory of the [OCFL Object Root](#OCFL Object Root)
giving the OCFL version in the filename. The filename <span
id="E004">MUST</span> conform to the pattern `T=dvalue`, where `T`<span
id="E005">MUST</span> be 0, and `dvalue`<span id="E006">MUST</span> be
`ocfl_object_`, followed by the OCFL specification version number. The
text contents of the file <span id="E007">MUST</span> be the same as
`dvalue`, followed by a newline (`\n`).

### 3.3 Version Directories
{: #version-directories}

OCFL Object content <span id="E008">MUST</span> be stored as a sequence
of one or more versions. Each object version is stored in a version
directory under the object root. Version directory names <span
id="E104">MUST</span> be constructed by prepending `v` to the version
number. The version number <span id="E105">MUST</span> be taken from the
sequence of positive, base-ten integers: 1, 2, 3, etc.. The version
number sequence <span id="E009">MUST</span> start at 1 and <span
id="E010">MUST</span> be continuous without missing integers.

Implementations <span id="W001">SHOULD</span> use version directory
names constructed without zero-padding the version number, ie. `v1`,
`v2`, `v3`, etc..

For compatibility with existing filesystem conventions, implementations
MAY use zero-padded version directory numbers, with the following
restriction: If zero-padded version directory numbers are used then they
<span id="E011">MUST</span> start with the prefix `v` and then a zero.
For example, in an implementation that uses five digits for version
directory names then `v00001` to `v09999` are allowed, `v10000` is not
allowed.

The first version of an object defines the naming convention for all
version directories for the object. All version directories of an object
<span id="E012">MUST</span> use the same naming convention: either a
non-padded version directory number, or a zero-padded version directory
number of consistent length. The version naming convention <span
id="E013">MUST</span> be consistent across all versions. In all cases,
references to files inside version directories from inventory files
<span id="E014">MUST</span> use the actual version directory names.

There <span id="E015">MUST</span> be no other files as children of a
version directory, other than an [inventory file](#inventory) and a
[inventory digest](#inventory-digest). The version directory <span
id="W002">SHOULD NOT</span> contain any directories other than the
designated content sub-directory. Once created, the contents of a
version directory are expected to be immutable.

#### 3.3.1 Content Directory
{: #content-directory}

Version directories <span id="E016">MUST</span> contain a designated
content sub-directory if the version contains files to be preserved, and
<span id="W003">SHOULD NOT</span> contain this sub-directory otherwise.
The name of this designated sub-directory MAY be defined in the
[inventory file](#inventory) using the key `contentDirectory` with the
value being the chosen sub-directory name as a string, relative to the
version directory. The `contentDirectory` value <span
id="E0108">MUST</span> represent a direct child directory of the version
directory in which it is found. As such, the `contentDirectory` value
<span id="E017">MUST NOT</span> contain the forward slash (`/`) path
separator and <span id="E018">MUST NOT</span> be either one or two
periods (`.` or `..`). If the key `contentDirectory` is set, it <span
id="E019">MUST</span> be set in the first version of the object and
<span id="E020">MUST NOT</span> change between versions of the same
object.

If the key `contentDirectory` is not present in the [inventory
file](#inventory) then the name of the designated content sub-directory
<span id="E021">MUST</span> be `content`. OCFL-compliant tools
(including any validators) <span id="E022">MUST</span> ignore all
directories in the object version directory except for the designated
content directory.

Every file within a version's content directory <span
id="E023">MUST</span> be referenced in the [manifest](#manifest) section
of that version's inventory. There <span id="E024">MUST NOT</span> be
empty directories within a version's content directory. A directory that
would otherwise be empty MAY be maintained by creating a file within it
named according to local conventions, for example by making an empty
`.keep` file.

### 3.4 Digests
{: #digests}

A [digest](#digest) plays two roles in an OCFL Object. The first is that
digests allow for content-addressable reference to files within the OCFL
Object. That is, the connection between a file's [content path](#content
path) on physical storage and its [logical path](#logical path) in a
version of the object's content is made with a digest of its contents,
rather than its filename. This use of the content digest facilitates
de-duplication of files with the same content within an object, such as
files that are unchanged from one version to the next. The second role
that digests play is provide for fixity checks to determine whether a
file has become corrupt, through hardware degradation or accident for
example.

For content-addressing, OCFL Objects <span id="E025">MUST</span> use
either `sha512` or `sha256`, and <span id="W004">SHOULD</span> use
`sha512`. The choice of the `sha512` digest algorithm as default
recognizes that it has no known collision vulnerabilities and multiple
implementations are available.

For storage of additional fixity values, or to support legacy content
migration, implementers <span id="E026">MUST</span> choose from the
following controlled vocabulary of digest algorithms, or from a list of
additional algorithms given in the
\[[Digest-Algorithms-Extension](#ref-digest-algorithms-extension)\].
OCFL clients <span id="E027">MUST</span> support all fixity algorithms
given in the table below, and MAY support additional algorithms from the
extensions. Optional fixity algorithms that are not supported by a
client <span id="E028">MUST</span> be ignored by that client.

| Digest Algorithm Name | Note |
| --- | --- |
| `md5` | Insecure. Use only for legacy fixity values. MD5 algorithm and hex encoding defined by \[[RFC1321](#ref-rfc1321)\]. For example, the `md5` digest of a zero-length bitstream is `d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e`. |
| `sha1` | Insecure. Use only for legacy fixity values. SHA-1 algorithm defined by \[[FIPS-180-4](#ref-fips-180-4)\] and <span id="E029">MUST</span> be encoded using hex (base16) encoding \[[RFC4648](#ref-rfc4648)\]. For example, the `sha1` digest of a zero-length bitstream is `da39a3ee5e6b4b0d3255bfef95601890afd80709`. |
| `sha256` | Non-truncated form only; note performance implications. SHA-256 algorithm defined by \[[FIPS-180-4](#ref-fips-180-4)\] and <span id="E030">MUST</span> be encoded using hex (base16) encoding \[[RFC4648](#ref-rfc4648)\]. For example, the `sha256` digest of a zero-length bitstream starts `e3b0c44298fc1c149afbf4c8996fb92427ae41e4...` (64 hex digits long). |
| `sha512` | Default choice. Non-truncated form only. SHA-512 algorithm defined by \[[FIPS-180-4](#ref-fips-180-4)\] and <span id="E031">MUST</span> be encoded using hex (base16) encoding \[[RFC4648](#ref-rfc4648)\]. For example, the `sha512` digest of a zero-length bitstream starts `cf83e1357eefb8bdf1542850d66d8007d620e405...` (128 hex digits long). |
| `blake2b-512` | Full-length form only, using the 2B variant (64 bit) as defined by \[[RFC7693](#ref-rfc7693)\]. <span id="E032">MUST</span> be encoded using hex (base16) encoding \[[RFC4648](#ref-rfc4648)\]. For example, the `blake2b-512` digest of a zero-length bitstream starts `786a02f742015903c6c6fd852552d272912f4740...` (128 hex digits long). |

An OCFL Inventory MAY contain a fixity section that can store one or
more blocks containing fixity values using multiple digest algorithms.
See the [section on fixity](#fixity) below for further details.

> Non-normative note: Implementers may also store copies of their file
digests in a system external to their OCFL Object stores at the point of
ingest, to further safeguard against the possibility of malicious
manipulation of file contents and digests.

> Implementers should be aware that base16 digests are case insensitive.
Different tools will generate digests in uppercase or lowercase, and
this may lead to case differences between references to a digest and the
digest itself within the inventory. If string-based methods are used to
work with digests and inventories (as is the case in most common JSON
libraries) then extra care must be taken to ensure case-insensitive
comparisons are being made.

### 3.5 Inventory
{: #inventory}

An OCFL Object Inventory <span id="E033">MUST</span> follow the JSON
(defined by \[[RFC8259](#ref-rfc8259)\]) structure described in this
section with contents encoded in UTF-8, and <span id="E034">MUST</span>
be named `inventory.json`. The order of entries in both the JSON objects
and arrays used in inventory files has no significance. An OCFL Object
Inventory <span id="E102">MUST NOT</span> contain any keys not described
in this specification.

The forward slash (/) path separator <span id="E035">MUST</span> be used
in content paths in the [manifest](#manifest) and [fixity](#fixity)
blocks within the inventory. Implementations that target systems using
other separators will need to translate paths appropriately.

> Non-normative note: A \[[JSON-Schema](#ref-json-schema)\] for
validating OCFL Object Inventory files is provided at
[inventory_schema.json](inventory_schema.json).

#### 3.5.1 Basic Structure
{: #inventory-structure}

Every OCFL inventory <span id="E036">MUST</span> include the following
keys:

* **id:** A unique identifier for the OCFL Object. This <span
id="E037">MUST</span> be unique in the local context, <span
id="E110">MUST NOT</span> change between versions of the same object,
and <span id="W005">SHOULD</span> be a URI \[[RFC3986](#ref-rfc3986)\].
There is no expectation that a URI used is resolvable. For example, URNs
\[[RFC8141](#ref-rfc8141)\] MAY be used.

* **type:** A type for the inventory JSON object that also serves to
document the OCFL specification version that the inventory complies
with. In the object root inventory this <span id="E038">MUST</span> be
the URI of the inventory section of the specification version matching
the object conformance declaration. For the current specification
version the value is `https://ocfl.io/1.1/spec/#inventory`.

* **digestAlgorithm:** The digest algorithm used for calculating digests
for content-addressing within the OCFL Object and for the [Inventory
Digest](#inventory-digest). This <span id="E039">MUST</span> be the
algorithm used in the `manifest` and `state` blocks, see the [section on
Digests](#digests) for more information about algorithms.

* **head:** The version directory name of the most recent version of the
object. This <span id="E040">MUST</span> be the version directory name
with the highest version number.

There MAY be the following key:

* **contentDirectory:** The name of the designated content directory
within the version directories. If not specified then the content
directory name is `content`.

In addition to these keys, there <span id="E041">MUST</span> be two
other blocks present, `manifest` and `versions`, which are discussed in
the next two sections.

#### 3.5.2 Manifest
{: #manifest}

The value of the `manifest` key <span id="E106">MUST</span> be a JSON
object, and each key <span id="E107">MUST</span> correspond to a digest
value key found in one or more `state` blocks of the current and/or
previous `version` blocks of the [OCFL Object](#OCFL Object). The value
for each key <span id="E092">MUST</span> be an array containing the
[content path](#content path)s of files in the OCFL Object that have
content with the given digest. As JSON keys are case sensitive, for
digest algorithms with case insensitive digest values, there is an
additional requirement that each digest value <span
id="E096">MUST</span> occur only once in the manifest block for any
digest algorithm, regardless of case. Content paths within a manifest
block <span id="E042">MUST</span> be relative to the [OCFL Object
Root](#OCFL Object Root). The following restrictions avoid ambiguity and
provide path safety for clients processing the `manifest`.

* The content path <span id="E098">MUST</span> be interpreted as a set
of one or more path elements joined by a `/` path separator.

* Path elements <span id="E099">MUST NOT</span> be `.`, `..`, or empty
(`//`).

* A content path <span id="E100">MUST NOT</span> begin or end with a
forward slash (`/`).

* Within an inventory, content paths <span id="E101">MUST</span> be
unique and non-conflicting, so the content path for a file cannot appear
as the initial part of another content path.

> Non-normative note: If only one file is stored in the OCFL Object for
each digest, fully de-duplicating the content, then there will be only
one [content path](#content path) for each digest. There may, however,
be multiple logical paths for a given digest if the content was not
entirely de-duplicated when constructing the OCFL Object.

> An example manifest object for three content paths, all in version 1,
is shown below:

> ```
"manifest": {
    "7dcc35...c31": [ "v1/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
    "cf83e1...a3e": [ "v1/content/empty.txt" ],
    "ffccf6...62e": [ "v1/content/image.tiff" ]
  }
```

#### 3.5.3 Versions
{: #versions}

An OCFL Object Inventory <span id="E043">MUST</span> include a block for
storing versions. This block <span id="E044">MUST</span> have the key of
`versions` within the inventory, and it <span id="E045">MUST</span> be a
JSON object. The keys of this object <span id="E046">MUST</span>
correspond to the names of the [version
directories](#version-directories) used. Each value <span
id="E047">MUST</span> be another JSON object that characterizes the
version, as described in the [3.5.3.1 Version](#version) section.

##### 3.5.3.1 Version
{: #version}

A JSON object to describe one [OCFL Version](#OCFL Version), which <span
id="E048">MUST</span> include the following keys:

* **created:** The value of this key is the datetime of creation of this
version. It <span id="E049">MUST</span> be expressed in the Internet
Date/Time Format defined by \[[RFC3339](#ref-rfc3339)\]. This format
requires the inclusion of a timezone value or `Z` for UTC, and that the
time component be granular to the second level (with optional fractional
seconds).

* **state:** The value of this key is a JSON object, containing a list
of keys and values corresponding to the [logical state](#logical state)
of the object at that version. The keys of this JSON object are digest
values, each of which <span id="E050">MUST</span> exactly match a digest
value key in the [manifest of the inventory](#manifest). The value for
each key is an array containing [logical path](#logical path) names of
files in the OCFL Object's logical state that have content with the
given digest.

[Logical paths](#logical-path) present the structure of an OCFL Object
at a given version. This is given as an array of values, with the
following restrictions to provide for path safety in the common case of
the logical path value representing a file path.

* The logical path <span id="E051">MUST</span> be interpreted as a set
of one or more path elements joined by a `/` path separator.

* Path elements <span id="E052">MUST NOT</span> be `.`, `..`, or empty
(`//`).

* A logical path <span id="E053">MUST NOT</span> begin or end with a
forward slash (`/`).

* Within a version, logical paths <span id="E095">MUST</span> be unique
and non-conflicting, so the logical path for a file cannot appear as the
initial part of another logical path.

> Non-normative note: The [logical state](#logical state) of the object
uses content-addressing to map logical paths to their bitstreams, as
expressed in the manifest section of the inventory. Notably, the version
state provides de-duplication of content within the OCFL Object by
mapping multiple logical paths with the same content to the same digest
in the manifest. See
\[[OCFL-Implementation-Notes](#ref-ocfl-implementation-notes)\].

> An example `state` block is shown below:

> ```
"state": {
    "4d27c8...b53": [ "foo/bar.xml" ],
    "cf83e1...a3e": [ "empty.txt", "empty2.txt" ]
  }
```

> This `state` block describes an object with 3 files, two of which have
the same content (`empty.txt` and `empty2.txt`), and one of which is in
a sub-directory (`bar.xml`). The [logical state](#logical state) shown
as a tree is thus:

> ```
â”œâ”€â”€ empty.txt
    â”œâ”€â”€ empty2.txt
    â””â”€â”€ foo
        â””â”€â”€ bar.xml
```

The JSON object describing an [OCFL Version](#OCFL Version), <span
id="W007">SHOULD</span> include the following keys:

* **message:** The value of this key is freeform text, used to record
the rationale for creating this version. It <span id="E094">MUST</span>
be a JSON string.

* **user:** The value of this key is a JSON object intended to identify
the user or agent that created the current [OCFL Version](#OCFL
Version). The value of the `user` key <span id="E054">MUST</span>
contain a user name key, `name` and <span id="W008">SHOULD</span>
contain an address key, `address`. The `name` value is any readable name
of the user, e.g., a proper name, user ID, agent ID. The `address` value
<span id="W009">SHOULD</span> be a URI: either a mailto URI
\[[RFC6068](#ref-rfc6068)\] with the e-mail address of the user or a URL
to a personal identifier, e.g., an ORCID iD.

#### 3.5.4 Fixity
{: #fixity}

An OCFL Object inventory MAY include a block for storing additional
fixity information to supplement the complete set of digests in the
[Manifest](#manifest), for example to support legacy digests from a
content migration. If present, this block <span id="E055">MUST</span>
have the key of `fixity` within the inventory, and its value <span
id="E111">MUST</span> be a JSON object, which MAY be empty.

The keys within the `fixity` block <span id="E056">MUST</span>
correspond to the controlled vocabulary of [digest algorithm
names](#digest-algorithms) listed in the [Digests](#digests) section, or
in a table given in an [Extension](#Extension). The value of the fixity
block for a particular digest algorithm <span id="E057">MUST</span>
follow the structure of the [3.5.2 Manifest](#manifest) block; that is,
a key corresponding to the digest value, and an array of [content
path](#content path)s. The `fixity` block for any digest algorithm MAY
include digest values for any subset of content paths in the object.
Where included, the digest values given <span id="E093">MUST</span>
match the digests of the files at the corresponding content paths. As
JSON keys are case sensitive, for digest algorithms with case
insensitive digest values, there is an additional requirement that each
digest value <span id="E097">MUST</span> occur only once in the `fixity`
block for any digest algorithm, regardless of case. There is no
requirement that all content files have a value in the `fixity` block,
or that fixity values provided in one version are carried forward to
later versions.

> An example `fixity` with `md5` and `sha1` digests is shown below. In
this case the `md5` digest values are provided only for version 1
content paths.

> ```
"fixity": {
    "md5": {
      "184f84e28cbe75e050e9c25ea7f2e939": [ "v1/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
      "c289c8ccd4bab6e385f5afdd89b5bda2": [ "v1/content/image.tiff" ],
      "d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e": [ "v1/content/empty.txt" ]
    },
    "sha1": {
      "66709b068a2faead97113559db78ccd44712cbf2": [ "v1/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
      "a6357c99ecc5752931e133227581e914968f3b9c": [ "v2/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
      "b9c7ccc6154974288132b63c15db8d2750716b49": [ "v1/content/image.tiff" ],
      "da39a3ee5e6b4b0d3255bfef95601890afd80709": [ "v1/content/empty.txt" ]
    }
  }
```

### 3.6 Inventory Digest
{: #inventory-digest}

Every occurrence of an inventory file <span id="E058">MUST</span> have
an accompanying sidecar file named `inventory.json.ALGORITHM` stating
its digest, where `ALGORITHM` is the chosen digest algorithm for the
object. The ALGORITHM <span id="E059">MUST</span> match the value given
for the `digestAlgorithm` key in the inventory. An example might be
`inventory.json.sha512`.

The digest sidecar file <span id="E060">MUST</span> contain the digest
of the inventory file. This <span id="E061">MUST</span> follow the
format:

```
DIGEST inventory.json
```

One or more whitespace characters (spaces or tabs) must separate DIGEST
from the string `inventory.json`; that is, the name of the inventory
file in the same directory.

The digest of the inventory <span id="E062">MUST</span> be computed only
after all changes to the inventory have been made, and thus writing the
digest sidecar file is the last step in the versioning process.

### 3.7 Version Inventory and Inventory Digest
{: #version-inventory}

Every OCFL Object <span id="E063">MUST</span> have an inventory file
within the OCFL Object Root, corresponding to the state of the OCFL
Object at the current version. Additionally, every version directory
<span id="W010">SHOULD</span> include an inventory file that is an
[Inventory](#inventory) of all content for versions up to and including
that particular version. Where an OCFL Object contains `inventory.json`
in version directories, the inventory file in the OCFL Object Root <span
id="E064">MUST</span> be the same as the file in the most recent
version. See also requirements for the corresponding [Inventory
Digest](#inventory-digest).

In the case that prior version directories include an inventory file
there will be multiple inventory files describing prior versions within
the OCFL Object. Each `version` block in each prior inventory file <span
id="E066">MUST</span> represent the same [logical state](#logical state)
as the corresponding `version` block in the current inventory file.
Additionally, the values of the `created`, `message` and `user` keys in
each `version` block in each prior inventory file <span
id="W011">SHOULD</span> have the same values as the corresponding keys
in the corresponding `version` block in the current inventory file.

#### 3.7.1 Conformance of prior versions
{: #conformance-of-prior-versions}

Version directories in OCFL are intended to be immutable in that
existing version directories do not change when a new version directory
is added. Each version directory within an OCFL Object <span
id="E103">MUST</span> conform to either the same or a later OCFL
specification version as the preceding version directory. If inventories
are stored in the version directories then the OCFL specification
version for a given version directory is apparent from the `type`
attribute in that [inventory](#inventory-structure).

### 3.8 Logs Directory
{: #logs-directory}

The base directory of an OCFL Object MAY contain a directory named
`logs`, which MAY be empty. Implementers <span id="W012">SHOULD</span>
use the [logs directory](#logs directory) for storing files that contain
a record of actions taken on the object. Since these logs may be subject
to local standards requirements, the format of these logs is considered
out-of-scope for the OCFL Object. Clients operating on the object MAY
log actions here that are not otherwise captured.

> Non-normative note: The purpose of the logs directory is to provide
implementers with a location for storing local information about actions
to the OCFL Object's content that is not part of the content itself.

> As an example, implementers may have different local requirements to
store audit information for their content. Some may wish to store a log
entry indicating that an audit was conducted, and nothing was wrong,
while others may wish to only store a log entry if an intervention was
required.

### 3.9 Object Extensions
{: #object-extensions}

The base directory of an OCFL Object MAY contain a directory named
`extensions` for the purposes of extending the functionality of an OCFL
Object. The `extensions` directory <span id="E067">MUST NOT</span>
contain any files, and no sub-directories other than extension
sub-directories. Extension sub-directories <span id="W013">SHOULD</span>
be named according to a [registered extension name](#registered
extension name) in the [OCFL Extensions
repository](https://ocfl.github.io/extensions/).

> Non-normative note: Extension sub-directories should use the same name
as a registered extension in order to both avoid the possiblity of an
extension sub-directory colliding with the name of another registered
extension as well as to facilitate the recognition of extensions by OCFL
clients. See also [Documenting Local
Extensions](#documenting-local-extensions).

## 4. OCFL Storage Root
{: #storage-root}

An [OCFL Storage Root](#OCFL Storage Root) is the base directory of an
OCFL storage layout.

### 4.1 Root Structure
{: #root-structure}

An OCFL Storage Root <span id="E069">MUST</span> contain a [Root
Conformance Declaration](#root-conformance-declaration) identifying it
as such.

An OCFL Storage Root MAY contain other files as direct children. These
might include a human-readable copy of the OCFL specification to make
the storage root self-documenting, or files used to [document local
extensions](#documenting-local-extensions). An OCFL validator <span
id="E087">MUST</span> ignore any files in the storage root it does not
understand.

An OCFL Storage Root <span id="E088">MUST NOT</span> contain directories
or sub-directories other than as a directory hierarchy used to store
OCFL Objects or for [storage root extensions](#storage-root-extensions).
The directory hierarchy used to store OCFL Objects <span id="E072">MUST
NOT</span> contain files that are not part of an OCFL Object. Empty
directories <span id="E073">MUST NOT</span> appear under a storage root.

An OCFL Storage Root MAY contain a file named `ocfl_layout.json` to
describe the arrangement of directories and OCFL objects under the
storage root. If present, `ocfl_layout.json`<span id="E070">MUST</span>
be a JSON (defined by \[[RFC8259](#ref-rfc8259)\]) document encoded in
UTF-8 and include the following two keys in the root JSON object:

* `extension` - An extension name that identifies an arrangement of
directories and OCFL objects under the storage root, i.e. how OCFL
object identifiers are mapped to directory hierarchies. The value of the
`extension` key <span id="E071">MUST</span> be the [registered extension
name](#registered extension name) for the extension defining the
arrangement under the storage root.

* `description` - A human readable description of the arrangement of
directories and OCFL objects under the storage root.

Although implementations may require multiple OCFL Storage Rootsâ€”that
is, several logical or physical volumes, or multiple "buckets" in an
object storeâ€”each OCFL Storage Root <span id="E074">MUST</span> be
independent.

The following example OCFL Storage Root represents the minimal set of
files and folders:

```
[storage_root]
    â”œâ”€â”€ 0=ocfl_1.1
    â”œâ”€â”€ ocfl_1.1.txt (human-readable text of the OCFL specification; optional)
    â””â”€â”€ ocfl_layout.json (description of storage hierarchy layout; optional)
```

### 4.2 Root Conformance Declaration
{: #root-conformance-declaration}

The OCFL version declaration <span id="E075">MUST</span> be formatted
according to the \[[NAMASTE](#ref-namaste)\] specification. There <span
id="E076">MUST</span> be exactly one version declaration file in the
base directory of the [OCFL Storage Root](#OCFL Storage Root) giving the
OCFL version in the filename. The filename <span id="E077">MUST</span>
conform to the pattern `T=dvalue`, where `T`<span id="E078">MUST</span>
be 0, and `dvalue`<span id="E079">MUST</span> be `ocfl_`, followed by
the OCFL specification version number. The text contents of the file
<span id="E080">MUST</span> be the same as `dvalue`, followed by a
newline (`\n`).

Root conformance indicates that the OCFL Storage Root conforms to this
section (i.e. the OCFL Storage Root section) of the specification. OCFL
Objects within the OCFL Storage Root also include a conformance
declaration which <span id="E081">MUST</span> indicate OCFL Object
conformance to the same or earlier version of the specification.

### 4.3 Storage Hierarchies
{: #root-hierarchies}

[OCFL Object Root](#OCFL Object Root)s <span id="E082">MUST</span> be
stored either as the terminal resource at the end of a directory storage
hierarchy or as direct children of a containing [OCFL Storage
Root](#OCFL Storage Root).

A common practice is to use a unique identifier scheme to compose this
storage hierarchy, typically arranged according to some form of the
\[[PairTree](#ref-pairtree)\] specification. Irrespective of the pattern
chosen for the storage hierarchies, the following restrictions apply:

1. There <span id="E083">MUST</span> be a deterministic mapping from an
object identifier to a unique storage path

2. Storage hierarchies <span id="E084">MUST NOT</span> include files
within intermediate directories

3. Storage hierarchies <span id="E085">MUST</span> be terminated by OCFL
Object Roots

4. Storage hierarchies within the same OCFL Storage Root <span
id="W014">SHOULD</span> use just one layout pattern

5. Storage hierarchies within the same OCFL Storage Root <span
id="W015">SHOULD</span> consistently use either a directory hierarchy of
OCFL Objects or top-level OCFL Objects

### 4.4 Storage Root Extensions
{: #storage-root-extensions}

The behavior of the storage root may be extended to support features
from other specifications.

The base directory of an OCFL Storage Root MAY contain a directory named
`extensions` for the purposes of extending the functionality of an OCFL
Storage Root. The storage root `extensions` directory <span
id="E086">MUST</span> conform to the same guidelines and limitations as
those defined for [object extensions](#object-extensions).

> Non-normative note: Storage extensions can be used to support
additional features, such as providing the storage hierarchy disposition
when pairtree is in use, or additional human-readable text about the
nature of the storage root.

### 4.5 Documenting Local Extensions
{: #documenting-local-extensions}

It is preferable that both [Object Extensions](#object-extensions) and
[Storage Root Extenstions](#storage-root-extensions) are documented and
registered in the [OCFL Extensions
repository](https://ocfl.github.io/extensions/). However, local
extensions MAY be documented by including a plain text document directly
in the storage root, thus making the storage root self-documenting.

### 4.6 Filesystem features
{: #filesystem-features}

In order to maximize the compatibility of the OCFL with different
filesystems, and thus improve the portability of OCFL Objects between
different systems, some restrictions on the use of certain filesystem
features are necessary. If the preservation of non-OCFL-compliant
features is required then the content <span id="E089">MUST</span> be
wrapped in a suitable disk or filesystem image format which OCFL can
treat as a regular file.

1. Filesystem metadata (e.g. permissions, access, and creation times)
are not considered portable between filesystems or preservable through
file transfer operations. These attributes also cannot be validated in
terms of fixity in a consistent manner. As such, the OCFL does not
support the portability of these attributes.

2. Hard and soft (symbolic) links are not portable and <span
id="E090">MUST NOT</span> be used within OCFL Storage hierachies. A
common use case for links is storage deduplication. OCFL inventories
provide a portable method of achieving the same effect by using digests
to address content.

3. File paths and filenames in the OCFL are case sensitive. Filesystems
<span id="E091">MUST</span> preserve the case of OCFL filepaths and
filenames.

4. Transparent filesystem features such as compression and encryption
should be effectively invisible to OCFL operations. Consequently, they
should not be expected to be portable.

## 5. Examples
{: #examples}

### 5.1 Minimal OCFL Object
{: #example-minimal-object}

The following example OCFL Object has content that is a single file
(`file.txt`), and just one version (`v1`):

```
[object root]
    â”œâ”€â”€ 0=ocfl_object_1.1
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
    â””â”€â”€ v1
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
        â””â”€â”€ content
            â””â”€â”€ file.txt
```

The inventory for this OCFL Object, the same both at the top-level and
in the `v1` directory, might be:

```
{
  "digestAlgorithm": "sha512",
  "head": "v1",
  "id": "http://example.org/minimal",
  "manifest": {
    "7545b8...f67": [ "v1/content/file.txt" ]
  },
  "type": "https://ocfl.io/1.1/spec/#inventory",
  "versions": {
    "v1": {
      "created": "2018-10-02T12:00:00Z",
      "message": "One file",
      "state": {
        "7545b8...f67": [ "file.txt" ]
      },
      "user": {
        "address": "mailto:alice@example.org",
        "name": "Alice"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### 5.2 Versioned OCFL Object
{: #example-versioned-object}

The following example OCFL Object has three versions:

```
[object root]
    â”œâ”€â”€ 0=ocfl_object_1.1
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
    â”œâ”€â”€ v1
    â”‚Â Â  â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
    â”‚Â Â  â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
    â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ content
    â”‚       â”œâ”€â”€ empty.txt
    â”‚       â”œâ”€â”€ foo
    â”‚       â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ bar.xml
    â”‚       â””â”€â”€ image.tiff
    â”œâ”€â”€ v2
    â”‚Â Â  â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
    â”‚Â Â  â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
    â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ content
    â”‚       â””â”€â”€ foo
    â”‚       Â  Â  â””â”€â”€ bar.xml
    â””â”€â”€ v3
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
        â””â”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
```

In `v1` there are three files, `empty.txt`, `foo/bar.xml`, and
`image.tiff`. In `v2` the content of `foo/bar.xml` is changed,
`empty2.txt` is added with the same content as `empty.txt`, and
`image.tiff` is removed. In `v3` the file `empty.txt` is removed, and
`image.tiff` is reinstated. As a result of forward-delta versioning, the
object tree above shows only new content added in each version. The
inventory shown below details the other changes, includes additional
fixity information using `md5` and `sha1` digest algorithms, and minimal
metadata for each version.

```
{
  "digestAlgorithm": "sha512",
  "fixity": {
    "md5": {
      "184f84e28cbe75e050e9c25ea7f2e939": [ "v1/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
      "2673a7b11a70bc7ff960ad8127b4adeb": [ "v2/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
      "c289c8ccd4bab6e385f5afdd89b5bda2": [ "v1/content/image.tiff" ],
      "d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e": [ "v1/content/empty.txt" ]
    },
    "sha1": {
      "66709b068a2faead97113559db78ccd44712cbf2": [ "v1/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
      "a6357c99ecc5752931e133227581e914968f3b9c": [ "v2/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
      "b9c7ccc6154974288132b63c15db8d2750716b49": [ "v1/content/image.tiff" ],
      "da39a3ee5e6b4b0d3255bfef95601890afd80709": [ "v1/content/empty.txt" ]
    }
  },
  "head": "v3",
  "id": "ark:/12345/bcd987",
  "manifest": {
    "4d27c8...b53": [ "v2/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
    "7dcc35...c31": [ "v1/content/foo/bar.xml" ],
    "cf83e1...a3e": [ "v1/content/empty.txt" ],
    "ffccf6...62e": [ "v1/content/image.tiff" ]
  },
  "type": "https://ocfl.io/1.1/spec/#inventory",
  "versions": {
    "v1": {
      "created": "2018-01-01T01:01:01Z",
      "message": "Initial import",
      "state": {
        "7dcc35...c31": [ "foo/bar.xml" ],
        "cf83e1...a3e": [ "empty.txt" ],
        "ffccf6...62e": [ "image.tiff" ]
      },
      "user": {
        "address": "mailto:alice@example.com",
        "name": "Alice"
      }
    },
    "v2": {
      "created": "2018-02-02T02:02:02Z",
      "message": "Fix bar.xml, remove image.tiff, add empty2.txt",
      "state": {
        "4d27c8...b53": [ "foo/bar.xml" ],
        "cf83e1...a3e": [ "empty.txt", "empty2.txt" ]
      },
      "user": {
        "address": "mailto:bob@example.com",
        "name": "Bob"
      }
    },
    "v3": {
      "created": "2018-03-03T03:03:03Z",
      "message": "Reinstate image.tiff, delete empty.txt",
      "state": {
        "4d27c8...b53": [ "foo/bar.xml" ],
        "cf83e1...a3e": [ "empty2.txt" ],
        "ffccf6...62e": [ "image.tiff" ]
      },
      "user": {
        "address": "mailto:cecilia@example.com",
        "name": "Cecilia"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### 5.3 Different Logical and Content Paths in an OCFL Object
{: #example-object-diff-paths}

The following example OCFL Object inventory shows how content paths may
differ from logical paths. The example object has just one version,
`v1`, which has two files with logical paths `a file.wxy` and `another
file.xyz` as shown in the `state` block. The corresponding content paths
are `v1/content/3bacb119a98a15c5` and `v1/content/9f2bab8ef869947d`
respectively, as shown in the `manifest`. Except for location within the
appropriate version directory, `v1/content` in this example, the OCFL
specification does not constrain the choice of content paths used when
creating or updating an OCFL object. The choice might depend on
particular limitations of, or optimizations for, the target storage
system, or on portability considerations. Any compliant implementation
will be able to recover version state with the original logical paths.

```
{
  "digestAlgorithm": "sha512",
  "head": "v1",
  "id": "http://example.org/diff-paths",
  "manifest": {
    "7545b8...f67": [ "v1/content/3bacb119a98a15c5" ],
    "af318d...3cd": [ "v1/content/9f2bab8ef869947d" ]
  },
  "type": "https://ocfl.io/1.1/spec/#inventory",
  "versions": {
    "v1": {
      "created": "2019-03-14T20:31:00Z",
      "state": {
        "7545b8...f67": [ "a file.wxy" ],
        "af318d...3cd": [ "another file.xyz" ]
      },
      "user": {
        "address": "mailto:admin@example.org",
        "name": "Some Admin"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### 5.4 BagIt in an OCFL Object
{: #example-bagit-in-ocfl}

\[[BagIt](#ref-bagit)\] is a common file packaging specification, but
unlike the OCFL it does not provide a mechanism for content versioning.
Using the OCFL it is possible to store a BagIt structure with content
versioning, such that when the [logical state](#logical state) is
resolved, it creates a valid BagIt 'bag'. This example will illustrate
one way this can be accomplished, using the [example of a basic
bag](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8493#section-4.1) given in
the BagIt specification.

```
[object root]
    â”œâ”€â”€ 0=ocfl_object_1.1
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
    â””â”€â”€ v1
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
        â””â”€â”€ content
            â””â”€â”€ myfirstbag
                â”œâ”€â”€ bagit.txt
                â”œâ”€â”€ data
                â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ 27613-h
                â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ images
                â”‚Â Â          â”œâ”€â”€ q172.png
                â”‚Â Â          â””â”€â”€ q172.txt
                â””â”€â”€ manifest-md5.txt
```

If, for example, a new directory were added in a subsequent version, the
OCFL Object would look like this:

```
[object root]
    â”œâ”€â”€ 0=ocfl_object_1.1
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
    â”œâ”€â”€ v1
    â”‚   â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
    â”‚   â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
    â”‚   â””â”€â”€ content
    â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ myfirstbag
    â”‚Â Â          â”œâ”€â”€ bagit.txt
    â”‚Â Â          â”œâ”€â”€ data
    â”‚Â Â          â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ 27613-h
    â”‚Â Â          â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ images
    â”‚Â Â          â”‚Â Â          â”œâ”€â”€ q172.png
    â”‚Â Â          â”‚Â Â          â””â”€â”€ q172.txt
    â”‚Â Â          â””â”€â”€ manifest-md5.txt
    â””â”€â”€ v2
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
        â””â”€â”€ content
            â””â”€â”€ myfirstbag
                â”œâ”€â”€ data
                â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ 27614-h
                â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ images
                â”‚Â Â          â”œâ”€â”€ q173.png
                â”‚Â Â          â””â”€â”€ q173.txt
                â””â”€â”€ manifest-md5.txt
```

The state of the object at version 2 would be the following BagIt
object:

```
myfirstbag
    â”œâ”€â”€ bagit.txt
    â”œâ”€â”€ data
    â”‚Â Â  â”œâ”€â”€ 27613-h
    â”‚Â Â  â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ images
    â”‚Â Â  â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ q172.png
    â”‚Â Â  â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ q172.txt
    â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ 27614-h
    â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ images
    â”‚Â Â          â”œâ”€â”€ q173.png
    â”‚Â Â          â””â”€â”€ q173.txt
    â””â”€â”€ manifest-md5.txt
```

The OCFL Inventory for this object would be as follows:

```
{
  "digestAlgorithm": "sha512",
  "head": "v2",
  "id": "urn:uri:example.com/myfirstbag",
  "manifest": {
    "cf83e1...a3e": [ "v1/content/myfirstbag/bagit.txt" ],
    "f15428...83f": [ "v1/content/myfirstbag/manifest-md5.txt" ],
    "85f2b0...007": [ "v1/content/myfirstbag/data/27613-h/images/q172.png" ],
    "d66d80...8bd": [ "v1/content/myfirstbag/data/27613-h/images/q172.txt" ],
    "2b0ff8...620": [ "v2/content/myfirstbag/manifest-md5.txt" ],
    "921d36...877": [ "v2/content/myfirstbag/data/27614-h/images/q173.png" ],
    "b8bdf1...927": [ "v2/content/myfirstbag/data/27614-h/images/q173.txt" ]
  },
  "type": "https://ocfl.io/1.1/spec/#inventory",
  "versions": {
    "v1": {
      "created": "2018-10-09T11:20:29.209164Z",
      "message": "Initial Ingest",
      "state": {
        "cf83e1...a3e": [ "myfirstbag/bagit.txt" ],
        "85f2b0...007": [ "myfirstbag/data/27613-h/images/q172.png" ],
        "d66d80...8bd": [ "myfirstbag/data/27613-h/images/q172.txt" ],
        "f15428...83f": [ "myfirstbag/manifest-md5.txt" ]
      },
      "user": {
        "address": "mailto:someone@example.org",
        "name": "Some One"
      }
    },
    "v2": {
      "created": "2018-10-31T11:20:29.209164Z",
      "message": "Added new images",
      "state": {
        "cf83e1...a3e": [ "myfirstbag/bagit.txt" ],
        "85f2b0...007": [ "myfirstbag/data/27613-h/images/q172.png" ],
        "d66d80...8bd": [ "myfirstbag/data/27613-h/images/q172.txt" ],
        "2b0ff8...620": [ "myfirstbag/manifest-md5.txt" ],
        "921d36...877": [ "myfirstbag/data/27614-h/images/q173.png" ],
        "b8bdf1...927": [ "myfirstbag/data/27614-h/images/q173.txt" ]
      },
      "user": {
        "address": "mailto:somebody-else@example.org",
        "name": "Somebody Else"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### 5.5 Moab in an OCFL Object
{: #example-moab-in-ocfl}

\[[Moab](#ref-moab)\] is an archive information package format developed
and used by Stanford University. Many of the ideas in Moab have been
refined by the OCFL, and the OCFL is designed to give institutions
currently using Moab an easy path to adoption.

Converting content preserved in a Moab object in a way that does not
compromise existing Moab access patterns whilst allowing for the
eventual use of OCFL-native workflows requires a Moab to OCFL conversion
tool. This tool uses the Moab-versioning gem to extract deltas and
digests of the Moab data directory for each Moab version and translate
those into version `state` blocks in an OCFL inventory file, which would
be placed in the root directory of the Moab object. The content of the
`data` directory in the Moab version directories (and thus, the
bitstreams that Moab is preserving) is tracked by OCFL, via the
`contentDirectory` value. The contents of the Moab `manifests`
directories are not tracked, as the intention is not to encapsulate a
Moab object inside an OCFL object, but rather to migrate Moab's
preserved bitstreams into an OCFL object without compromising legacy
access patterns.

During the transitionary period the OCFL inventory file exists only in
the root of the Moab object. Once OCFL-native object creation workflows
have been completed, future versions of that object will be fully OCFL
compliant - new versions will no longer have a manifests directory and
will contain an OCFL inventory file. At this stage OCFL tools will be
able to access all versions of the content originally preserved by Moab.

Consider the following sample Moab object:

```
[object root]
    â””â”€â”€ bj102hs9687
        â”œâ”€â”€ v0001
        â”‚Â Â    â”œâ”€â”€ data
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â  â”œâ”€â”€ content
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â  â”‚Â Â  â”œâ”€â”€ eric-smith-dissertation-augmented.pdf
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â  â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ eric-smith-dissertation.pdf
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ metadata
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ contentMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ descMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ identityMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ provenanceMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ relationshipMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ rightsMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ technicalMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ versionMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â Â    â””â”€â”€ manifests
        â”‚Â Â        â”œâ”€â”€ fileInventoryDifference.xml
        â”‚Â Â        â”œâ”€â”€ manifestInventory.xml
        â”‚Â Â        â”œâ”€â”€ signatureCatalog.xml
        â”‚Â Â        â”œâ”€â”€ versionAdditions.xml
        â”‚Â Â        â””â”€â”€ versionInventory.xml
        â”œâ”€â”€ v0002
        â”‚Â Â    â”œâ”€â”€ data
        â”‚Â Â    â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ metadata
        â”‚Â     â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ contentMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â     â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ embargoMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â     â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ events.xml
        â”‚Â     â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ identityMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â     â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ provenanceMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â     â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ relationshipMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â     â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ rightsMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â     â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ versionMetadata.xml
        â”‚Â     â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ workflows.xml
        â”‚Â     â””â”€â”€ manifests
        â”‚Â         â”œâ”€â”€ fileInventoryDifference.xml
        â”‚Â         â”œâ”€â”€ manifestInventory.xml
        â”‚Â         â”œâ”€â”€ signatureCatalog.xml
        â”‚Â         â”œâ”€â”€ versionAdditions.xml
        â”‚Â         â””â”€â”€ versionInventory.xml
        â””â”€â”€ v0003
              â”œâ”€â”€ data
              â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ metadata
              â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ contentMetadata.xml
              â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ descMetadata.xml
              â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ embargoMetadata.xml
              â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ events.xml
              â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ identityMetadata.xml
              â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ provenanceMetadata.xml
              â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ rightsMetadata.xml
              â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ technicalMetadata.xml
              â”‚Â Â      â”œâ”€â”€ versionMetadata.xml
              â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ workflows.xml
              â””â”€â”€ manifests
                  â”œâ”€â”€ fileInventoryDifference.xml
                  â”œâ”€â”€ manifestInventory.xml
                  â”œâ”€â”€ signatureCatalog.xml
                  â”œâ”€â”€ versionAdditions.xml
                  â””â”€â”€ versionInventory.xml
```

An OCFL inventory that tracks the `data` directory would include a
manifest comprised as follows. Note the absence of the `manifests`
directory, as we are not encapsulating the Moab object in an OCFL
object, and the presence of `contentDirectory` to specify `data` as the
preserved content directory:

```
{
  "digestAlgorithm": "sha512",
  "head": "v3",
  "id": "druid:bj102hs9687",
  "contentDirectory": "data",
  "manifest": {
    "98114a...588": [ "v0001/data/content/eric-smith-dissertation-augmented.pdf" ],
    "7f3d87...15b": [ "v0001/data/content/eric-smith-dissertation.pdf" ],
    "6d19f0...064": [ "v0001/data/metadata/technicalMetadata.xml" ],
    "6e4be4...375": [ "v0001/data/metadata/provenanceMetadata.xml" ],
    "d8a319...d0f": [ "v0001/data/metadata/descMetadata.xml" ],
    "de823a...acc": [ "v0001/data/metadata/rightsMetadata.xml" ],
    "080617...40c": [ "v0001/data/metadata/identityMetadata.xml" ],
    "e15267...58d": [ "v0001/data/metadata/versionMetadata.xml" ],
    "0d9e0b...9a2": [ "v0001/data/metadata/contentMetadata.xml" ],
    "dd9289...31d": [ "v0001/data/metadata/relationshipMetadata.xml" ],
    "7519c5...63f": [ "v0002/data/metadata/provenanceMetadata.xml" ],
    "abda4c...622": [ "v0002/data/metadata/workflows.xml" ],
    "76549e...b2b": [ "v0002/data/metadata/rightsMetadata.xml" ],
    "bdc4d6...3b6": [ "v0002/data/metadata/events.xml" ],
    "7b331c...f9b": [ "v0002/data/metadata/identityMetadata.xml" ],
    "80ceac...b9c": [ "v0002/data/metadata/versionMetadata.xml" ],
    "4853a2...fbe": [ "v0002/data/metadata/contentMetadata.xml" ],
    "1d5090...f5f": [ "v0002/data/metadata/relationshipMetadata.xml" ],
    "f209bf...ceb": [ "v0002/data/metadata/embargoMetadata.xml" ],
    "dd9125...d4b": [ "v0003/data/metadata/technicalMetadata.xml" ],
    "d9e177...477": [ "v0003/data/metadata/provenanceMetadata.xml" ],
    "4f5908...4f5": [ "v0003/data/metadata/workflows.xml" ],
    "e64db0...500": [ "v0003/data/metadata/descMetadata.xml" ],
    "05fa51...818": [ "v0003/data/metadata/rightsMetadata.xml" ],
    "d70dd8...5ad": [ "v0003/data/metadata/events.xml" ],
    "509a2d...dc6": [ "v0003/data/metadata/identityMetadata.xml" ],
    "548066...893": [ "v0003/data/metadata/versionMetadata.xml" ],
    "93884e...aae": [ "v0003/data/metadata/contentMetadata.xml" ],
    "4c5ab4...b02": [ "v0003/data/metadata/embargoMetadata.xml" ]
  },
  "type": "https://ocfl.io/1.1/spec/#inventory",
  "versions": {
    "v1": {
      "created": "2019-03-14T20:31:00Z",
      "state": {
        "98114a...588": [ "content/eric-smith-dissertation-augmented.pdf" ],
        "7f3d87...15b": [ "content/eric-smith-dissertation.pdf" ],
        "6d19f0...064": [ "metadata/technicalMetadata.xml" ],
        "6e4be4...375": [ "metadata/provenanceMetadata.xml" ],
        "d8a319...d0f": [ "metadata/descMetadata.xml" ],
        "de823a...acc": [ "metadata/rightsMetadata.xml" ],
        "080617...40c": [ "metadata/identityMetadata.xml" ],
        "e15267...58d": [ "metadata/versionMetadata.xml" ],
        "0d9e0b...9a2": [ "metadata/contentMetadata.xml" ],
        "dd9289...31d": [ "metadata/relationshipMetadata.xml" ]
      }
    },
    "v2": {
      "created": "2019-03-24T09:22:00Z",
      "state": {
        "98114a...588": [ "content/eric-smith-dissertation-augmented.pdf" ],
        "7f3d87...15b": [ "content/eric-smith-dissertation.pdf" ],
        "6d19f0...064": [ "metadata/technicalMetadata.xml" ],
        "7519c5...63f": [ "metadata/provenanceMetadata.xml" ],
        "d8a319...d0f": [ "metadata/descMetadata.xml" ],
        "76549e...b2b": [ "metadata/rightsMetadata.xml" ],
        "7b331c...f9b": [ "metadata/identityMetadata.xml" ],
        "80ceac...b9c": [ "metadata/versionMetadata.xml" ],
        "4853a2...fbe": [ "metadata/contentMetadata.xml" ],
        "1d5090...f5f": [ "metadata/relationshipMetadata.xml" ],
        "abda4c...622": [ "metadata/workflows.xml" ],
        "bdc4d6...3b6": [ "metadata/events.xml" ],
        "f209bf...ceb": [ "metadata/embargoMetadata.xml" ]
      }
    },
    "v3": {
      "created": "2019-04-02T11:07:00Z",
      "state": {
        "98114a...588": [ "content/eric-smith-dissertation-augmented.pdf" ],
        "7f3d87...15b": [ "content/eric-smith-dissertation.pdf" ],
        "dd9125...d4b": [ "metadata/technicalMetadata.xml" ],
        "d9e177...477": [ "metadata/provenanceMetadata.xml" ],
        "e64db0...500": [ "metadata/descMetadata.xml" ],
        "05fa51...818": [ "metadata/rightsMetadata.xml" ],
        "509a2d...dc6": [ "metadata/identityMetadata.xml" ],
        "548066...893": [ "metadata/versionMetadata.xml" ],
        "93884e...aae": [ "metadata/contentMetadata.xml" ],
        "1d5090...f5f": [ "metadata/relationshipMetadata.xml" ],
        "4f5908...4f5": [ "metadata/workflows.xml" ],
        "d70dd8...5ad": [ "metadata/events.xml" ],
        "4c5ab4...b02": [ "metadata/embargoMetadata.xml" ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### 5.6 Example Extended OCFL Storage Root
{: #example-extended-storage-root}

The following example OCFL Storage Root has an extension containing
custom content. The OCFL Storage Root itself remains valid.

```
[storage root]
    â”œâ”€â”€ 0=ocfl_1.1
    â”œâ”€â”€ extensions
    â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ 0000-example-extension
    â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ file-example.txt
    â”œâ”€â”€ ocfl_1.1.txt
    â””â”€â”€ ocfl_layout.json
```

### 5.7 Example Extended OCFL Object
{: #example-extended-object}

The following example OCFL Object has an extension containing custom
content. The OCFL Object itself remains valid.

```
[object root]
    â”œâ”€â”€ 0=ocfl_object_1.1
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
    â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
    â”œâ”€â”€ extensions
    â”‚Â Â  â””â”€â”€ 0000-example-extension
    â”‚Â Â      â””â”€â”€ file1-draft.txt
    â””â”€â”€ v1
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json
        â”œâ”€â”€ inventory.json.sha512
        â””â”€â”€ content
            â””â”€â”€ file.txt
```

## 6. References
{: #references}

### 6.1 Normative References
{: #normative-references}

<span id="ref-fips-180-4"/>**\[FIPS-180-4]** FIPS PUB 180-4 Secure Hash
Standard. U.S. Department of Commerce/National Institute of Standards
and Technology. URL:
<https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.180-4.pdf>

<span id="ref-namaste"/>**\[NAMASTE]** Directory Description with
Namaste Tags. J. Kunze.9 November 2009. URL:
<https://confluence.ucop.edu/download/attachments/14254149/NamasteSpec.pdf>

<span id="ref-rfc1321"/>**\[RFC1321]** The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm.
R. Rivest. IETF. April 1992. Informational. URL:
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1321>

<span id="ref-rfc3339"/>**\[RFC3339]** Date and Time on the Internet:
Timestamps. G. Klyne; C. Newman. IETF. July 2002. Proposed Standard.
URL: <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3339>

<span id="ref-rfc3986"/>**\[RFC3986]** Uniform Resource Identifier
(URI): Generic Syntax. T. Berners-Lee; R. Fielding; L. Masinter. IETF.
January 2005. Internet Standard. URL:
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986>

<span id="ref-rfc4648"/>**\[RFC4648]** The Base16, Base32, and Base64
Data Encodings. S. Josefsson. IETF. October 2006. Proposed Standard.
URL: <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4648>

<span id="ref-rfc7693"/>**\[RFC7693]** The BLAKE2 Cryptographic Hash and
Message Authentication Code (MAC). M-J. Saarinen, Ed.; J-P. Aumasson.
IETF. November 2015. Informational. URL:
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7693>

<span id="ref-rfc8259"/>**\[RFC8259]** The JavaScript Object Notation
(JSON) Data Interchange Format. T. Bray, Ed.. IETF. December 2017\.
Internet Standard. URL: <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259>

### 6.2 Informative References
{: #informative-references}

<span id="ref-bagit"/>**\[BagIt]** The BagIt File Packaging Format
(V1.0). J. Kunze; J. Littman; E. Madden; J. Scancella; C. Adams. 17
September 2018. URL: <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8493>

<span
id="ref-digest-algorithms-extension"/>**\[Digest-Algorithms-Extension]**
OCFL Community Extension 0001: Digest Algorithms. OCFL Editors.URL:
<https://ocfl.github.io/extensions/0001-digest-algorithms.html>

<span id="ref-json-schema"/>**\[JSON-Schema]** JSON Schema Validation: A
Vocabulary for Structural Validation of JSON. A. Wright; H Andrews.20
September 2018. URL:
<https://json-schema.org/latest/json-schema-validation.html>

<span id="ref-moab"/>**\[Moab]** The Moab Design for Digital Object
Versioning. Richard Anderson.15 July 2013. URL:
<https://journal.code4lib.org/articles/8482>

<span id="ref-oais"/>**\[OAIS]** Reference Model for an Open Archival
Information System (OAIS), Issue 2. June 2012. URL:
<https://public.ccsds.org/pubs/650x0m2.pdf>

<span
id="ref-ocfl-implementation-notes"/>**\[OCFL-Implementation-Notes]**
OCFL Implementation Notes. URL:
<https://ocfl.io/draft/implementation-notes>

<span id="ref-pairtree"/>**\[PairTree]** Pairtrees for Object Storage.
J. Kunze; M. Haye; E. Hetzner; M. Reyes; C. Snavely. 12 August 2008\.
URL: <https://confluence.ucop.edu/display/Curation/PairTree>

<span id="ref-rfc6068"/>**\[RFC6068]** The 'mailto' URI Scheme. M.
Duerst; L. Masinter; J. Zawinski. IETF. October 2010. Proposed Standard.
URL: <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6068>

<span id="ref-rfc8141"/>**\[RFC8141]** Uniform Resource Names (URNs). P.
Saint-Andre; J. Klensin. IETF. April 2017. Proposed Standard. URL:
<https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8141>

